Old Sultan
Grimm

A farmer once had a faithful dog called sultan, who had grownold, and lost all his teeth, so that he could no longer hold onto anything.  One day the farmer was standing with his wife beforethe house-door, and said, to-morrow I intend to shoot old sultan,he is no longer of any use.His wife, who felt pity for the faithful beast, answered, he hasserved us so long, and been so faithful, that we might well givehim his keep.What, said the man, you are not very bright.  He has not a toothleft in his head, and not a thief is afraid of him, now he cango.  If he has served us, he has had good feeding for it.The poor dog, who was lying stretched out in the sun not far off,had heard everything, and was sorry that the morrow was to be hislast day.  He had a good friend, the wolf, and he crept out inthe evening into the forest to him, and complained of the fatethat awaited him.  Listen, gossip, said the wolf, be of goodcheer, I will help you out of your trouble.I have thought ofsomething.  To-morrow, early in the morning, your master isgoing with his wife to make hay, and they will take their littlechild with them, for no one will be left behind in the house.They are wont, during work-time, to lay the child under the hedgein the shade, you lay yourself there too, just as if you wishedto guard it. Then I will come out of the wood, and carry offthe child.  You must rush swiftly after me, as if you wouldseize it again from me.  I will let it fall, and you will takeit back to its parents, who will think that you have saved it,and will be far too grateful to do you any harm, on the contrary,you will be in high favor, and they will never let you wantfor anything again.The plan pleased the dog, and it was carried out just as it wasarranged.  The father screamed when he saw the wolf running acrossthe field with his child, but when old sultan brought it back,then he was full of joy, and stroked him and said, not a hairof yours shall be hurt, you shall eat my bread free as long asyou live.  And to his wife he said, go home at once and make oldsultan some bread-sop that he will not have to bite, and bring thepillow out of my bed, I will give him that to lie upon.Henceforth old sultan was as well off as he could wish to be.Soon afterwards the wolf visited him, and was pleased thateverything had succeeded so well.  But, gossip, said he, you willjust wink an eye if, when I have a chance, I carry off one of yourmaster's fat sheep.  Do not reckon upon that, answered the dog,I will remain true to my master, I cannot agree to that. Thewolf, who thought that this could not be spoken in earnest, camecreeping about in the night and was going to take away the sheep.But the farmer, to whom the faithful sultan had told the wolf'splan, caught him and dressed his hide soundly with the flail.The wolf had to make himself scarce, but he cried out to the dog,wait a bit, you scoundrel, you shall pay for this.The next morning the wolf sent the boar to challenge the dog tocome out into the forest so that they might settle the affair.Old sultan could find no one to stand by him but a cat with onlythree legs, and as they went out together the poor cat limpedalong, and at the same time stretched out her tail into the airwith pain.The wolf and his friend were already at the appointed place, butwhen they saw their enemy coming they thought that he wasbringing a sabre with him, for they mistook the outstretched tailof the cat for one.  And when the poor beast hopped on its threelegs, they could only think every time that it was picking up astone to throw at them.  So they were both afraid, the wild boarcrept into the under-wood and the wolf jumped up a tree.The dog and the cat, when they came up, wondered that there wasno one to be seen.  The wild boar, however, had not been able tohide himself altogether, one of his ears was sticking out.  Whilstthe cat was looking carefully about, the boar moved his ear, thecat, who thought it was a mouse moving there, jumped upon it andbit it hard. The boar made a fearful noise and ran away,