Rapunzel
Grimm

There were once a man and a woman who had long in vainwished for a child.  At length the woman hoped that Godwas about to grant her desire.  These people had a littlewindow at the back of their house from which a splendid gardencould be seen, which was full of the most beautiful flowers andherbs.  It was, however, surrounded by a high wall, and no onedared to go into it because it belonged to an enchantress, who hadgreat power and was dreaded by all the world.  One day the womanwas standing by this window and looking down into the garden,when she saw a bed which was planted with the most beautifulrampion - rapunzel, and it looked so fresh and green that shelonged for it, and had the greatest desire to eat some.  This desireincreased every day, and as she knew that she could not get anyof it, she quite pined away, and began to look pale and miserable.Then her husband was alarmed, and asked, what ails you, dearwife.  Ah, she replied, if I can't eat some of the rampion, whichis in the garden behind our house, I shall die.  The man, who lovedher, thought, sooner than let your wife die, bring her some ofthe rampion yourself, let it cost what it will.  At twilight, heclambered down over the wall into the garden of the enchantress,hastily clutched a handful of rampion, and took it to his wife.  Sheat once made herself a salad of it, and ate it greedily.  It tastedso good to her - so very good, that the next day she longed for itthree times as much as before.  If he was to have any rest, herhusband must once more descend into the garden.  In the gloom ofevening, therefore, he let himself down again.  But when he hadclambered down the wall he was terribly afraid, for he saw theenchantress standing before him.  How can you dare, said she withangry look, descend into my garden and steal my rampion like athief.  You shall suffer for it.  Ah, answered he, let mercy takethe place of justice, I only made up my mind to do it out ofnecessity.  My wife saw your rampion from the window, and felt sucha longing for it that she would have died if she had not got someto eat.  Then the enchantress allowed her anger to be softened, andsaid to him, if the case be as you say, I will allow you to takeaway with you as much rampion as you will, only I make onecondition, you must give me the child which your wife will bringinto the world.  It shall be well treated, and I will care for itlike a mother.  The man in his terror consented to everything, andwhen the woman was brought to bed, the enchantress appeared at once,gave the child the name of rapunzel, and took it away with her.Rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child under the sun.When she was twelve years old, the enchantress shut her into atower, which lay in a forest, and had neither stairs nor door, butquite at the top was a little window.  When the enchantresswanted to go in, she placed herself beneath it and cried,     rapunzel, rapunzel,     let down your hair to me.