Name:	Oscar Pistorius Acquittal Can Be Appealed, Judge Says
Author:	Alan Cowell

	LONDON — A South African judge ruled on Wednesday that prosecutors 
may appeal her decision to acquit Oscar Pistorius, the disabled track 
star, on murder charges in the killing of his girlfriend last year.
But, in a complex ruling, Judge Thokozile Matilda Masipa rejected 
efforts by state prosecutors to appeal against the five-year sentence 
she passed on him.
	The prosecution had called the sentence "shockingly inappropriate" 
to the crime since Mr. Pistorius could be released into house arrest 
after 10 months in the hospital wing of a prison in Pretoria, the South 
African capital.
	In October, Judge Masipa acquitted Mr. Pistorius of murder but 
found him guilty of culpable homicide, equivalent to manslaughter, for 
firing four rounds from a handgun through a locked toilet cubicle door, 
killing his girlfriend, Reeva Steenkamp, on the other side.
	The judge’s ruling on Wednesday hinged on a distinction in South 
African law between culpable homicide, equivalent to manslaughter, and 
a form of murder when a defendant is accused of knowing that his actions 
may cause death.
	On Tuesday, the state prosecutor, Gerrie Nel, argued that 
Mr. Pistorius must have understood the likely outcome of opening fire 
and that he had therefore committed a form of murder regarded as a more 
serious crime than culpable homicide but a lesser offense than 
premeditated murder, which carries a 25-year minimum sentence.
	In a ruling streamed live on South African news websites, Judge 
Masipa said the issue was "not an easy one."
	On the sentence, she said she was "not persuaded that there was 
any material misdirection" when she sent Mr. Pistorius to prison for what 
some legal experts said seemed to be a relatively lenient sentence.
	But on the grounds for her verdict, she said the Supreme Court 
should consider whether a principle known as dolus eventualis — the 
grounds for a form of murder — had been "correctly applied."
"I cannot say the prospect of success at the Supreme Court is remote,"
she said.